[ spi_host, doc ] Added Programmer's Guide (#8594)
lowRISC/opentitan: hw/ip/spi_host/doc/_index.md

# Programmer's Guide

The operation of the SPI_HOST IP proceeds in seven general steps.

To initialize the IP:
1. Program the {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS" >}} multi-register with the appropriate timing and polarity settings for each `csb` line.
2. Set the desired interrupt parameters
3. Enable the IP

Then for each command:

4. Load the data to be transmitted into the FIFO using the {{< regref "DATA" >}} memory window.
5. Specify the target device by programming the {{< regref "CSID" >}}

> 6. Specify the structure of the command by writing each sement into the {{< regref "COMMAND" >}} register

Reviewer: sement -> segment

Author: ****
```suggestion
6. Specify the structure of the command by writing each segment into the {{< regref "COMMAND" >}} register
```

The SPI_HOST IP is however suitable for interacting with any number of SPI devices, and the same mode of operation can be used for any SPI device.

## Initializing the IP

### Per-target Configuration

The {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS" >}} multi-register must be programmed to reflect the requirements of the attached target devices.
As such these registers can be programmed once at initialization, or whenever a new device is connected (e.g., via changes in the external pin connections, or changes in the pinmux configuration).
The proper settings for the {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS" >}} fields (e.g., CPOL and CPHA, clock divider, ratios, and other timing or sampling requirements) will all depend on the specific device attached as well as the board level delays.

### Interrupt configuration

The next step is to configuration the interrupts for the SPI_HOST.
This should also be done at initialization using the following register fields:
- The {{< regref "ERROR_ENABLE" >}} register should be configured to indicate what types of error conditions (if any) should be ignored to not trigger an interrupt.

> At reset, these fields are all high indicating that all error classes trigger an interrupt.

Reviewer: "are all high" -> "are all set" or "are all ones"

Author: ```suggestion
At reset, these fields are all set indicating that all error classes trigger an interrupt.
```

- For interrupt driven I/O the {{< regref "EVENT_ENABLE" >}} register must be configured to select the desired event interrupts to signal the desired conditions (e.g. "FIFO empty", "FIFO at the watermark level", or "ready for next command segment").
By default, this register is all zeros, meaning all event interrupts are disabled, and thus all transactions must be managed by polling the status register.
   - When using the FIFO watermarks to send interrupts, the watermark levels must be set via the {{< regref "CONTROL.RX_WATERMARK" >}} and {{< regref "CONTROL.TX_WATERMARK" >}} fields.

- The event and error interrupts must finally be enabled using the {{< regref "INTR_ENABLE" >}} register.

### Enabling the SPI_HOST

The IP must be enabled before sending the first command by asserting the {{< regref "CONTROL.SPIEN" >}} bit.

## Issuing Commands

As mentioned above, each command is typically specified in three phases: loading the TX data, specifying the command segments/format, and reading the RX data.
In principle, the first two steps can be performed in either order.

> If the SPI_HOST FSM does not find any data to transmit it will simply stall until data is inserted.

Reviewer: FSM could be omitted, or expanded to "state machine".

Author: ```suggestion
If the SPI_HOST does not find any data to transmit it will simply stall until data is inserted.
```

> Meanwhile, the RX data is only available after the command format has been specified and processed by the FSM.

Reviewer: FSM -> "state machine"

Author: ```suggestion
Meanwhile, the RX data is only available after the command format has been specified and processed by the state machine.
```

For longer commands, with data larger than the capacity of the FIFOs, the command sequence may become more complex.
For instance, to send 1024 bytes of data in a single command, the TX data may need to be loaded several times if using a 256-byte FIFO.

> So in this example the programming sequence will consist of at least four iterations of entering TX data and waiting for the TX FIFO to drain.

Reviewer: For this whole section, should we refer to "transactions" instead of "commands"?

Author: Sure.  Done.

> So in this example the programming sequence will consist of at least four iterations of entering TX data and waiting for the TX FIFO to drain.

Reviewer: Thinking about how to make this section flow a bit better.

I think the first sentence is fine: the use of "transaction" describes what you want to happen and the use of "command sequence" is describing what the programmer will do to the IP block.

In the second sentence, I think "command" should be replaced with "transaction".

I might start the third sentence with "In this instance, ..." because the prior sentence starts with "For instance, ...".

Author: ```suggestion
For longer transactions, with data larger than the capacity of the FIFOs, the command sequence may become more complex.
For instance, to send 1024 bytes of data in a single transaction, the TX data may need to be loaded several times if using a 256-byte FIFO.
In this instance, the programming sequence will consist of at least four iterations of entering TX data and waiting for the TX FIFO to drain.
```

For the next TX segment, the transmitted data will start with the following *word* from the TX FIFO.

#### Refilling the TX FIFO

For extremely long transactions, the TX FIFO may not have enough capacity to hold all the data being transmitted.
In this case software can either poll the {{< regref "STATUS.TXQD" >}} register to determine the number of elements in the TX FIFO, or enable the SPI_HOST IP to send an interrupt when the FIFO drains to a certain level.
If {{< regref "INTR_ENABLE.spi_event" >}} and {{< regref "EVENT_ENABLE.TXWM" >}} are both asserted, the IP will send an interrupt whenever the number of elements in the TX FIFO falls below {{< regref "CONTROL.TX_WATERMARK" >}}.

### Specifying the Segments

Each write to the {{< regref "COMMAND" >}} register corresponds to a single command segment.
The length, CSAAT flag, direction and speed settings for that segment should all be packed into a single 32-bit register and written simultaneously to {{< regref "COMMAND" >}}.

The {{< regref "COMMAND" >}} should only be written when {{< regref "STATUS.READY" >}} is asserted.

> While each command segment is being processed, the SPI_HOST has room to queue up exactly one additional segment descriptor in the Command CDC.

Reviewer: CDC == ?

Author: ```suggestion
While each command segment is being processed, the SPI_HOST has room to queue up exactly one additional segment descriptor in the Command Clock Domain Crossing.
```

> Once a second command segment descriptor has been submitted, software must wait for the FSM to finish processing the current segment before submitting more.

Reviewer: "wait for the FSM to finish" -> "wait for the state machine to finish" or "what for the SPI_HOST to finish".

In addition to clearing the {{< regref "ERROR_STATUS" >}} register, firmware can also trigger a complete software reset via the {{< regref "CONTROL.SW_RST" >}} bit, as described in the next section.

Other system-level errors may arise due to improper programming of the target device (e.g., due to violations in the device programming model, or improper configuration of the SPI_HOST timing registers).
Given that the SPI protocol provides no mechanism for the target device to stall the bus, the SPI_HOST will continue to function even if the remote device becomes unresponsive.
In case of an unresponsive device, the RX FIFO will still accumulate data from the bus during RX segments, though the data values will be undefined.

## Software Reset Procedure

In the event of an error the SPI_HOST IP can be reset under software control using the following procedure:

1. Assert {{< regref "CONTROL.SW_RST" >}}.
2. Poll IP status registers for confirmation of successful state machine reset:
   - Wait for {{< regref "STATUS.ACTIVE" >}} to clear.
   - Wait for both FIFOs to completely drain by polling {{< regref "STATUS.TXQD" >}} and {{< regref "STATUS.RXQD" >}} until they reach zero.

> 3. Release {{ < regref "CONTROL.SW_RST ">}}.

Reviewer: I'd use set/clear over assert/release.

Author: Done!
